>>It's my pleasure to
introduce you to Dr. John Mack.
Dr. John Mack tells
the Prophets Conference
a story of one
man's determination
to bear witness to
cosmic mysteries
with extraordinary implications
for the human future.
An esteemed professor of
psychiatry at Harvard Medical
School and a Pulitzer Prize
winning biographer, Professor
Mack has become an expert
in the controversial study
of alien abductees
that challenge the most
basic assumptions that
make up our understanding
of our existence and our
role in the universe.
Connections between abductions,
near death experiences,
and past life regressions
are, Dr. Mack suggests,
vehicles for recovering
perennial wisdom.
Let's give a warm
welcome to Dr. John Mack.
[APPLAUSE]
>>I'm going to give a kind
of statement of the journey
that I've come to the
place where I arrived
at the focus of
the title, which is
the need for a sacred science
that can look at phenomena
such as the so-called
alien abduction
experience or near
death experiences
and which can have the
kind of reliability
that the scientific method
has achieved in relation
to the physical world.
I'm indebted to a writer,
an extraordinary scholar
by the name of Seyyed
Hossein Nasr, who
has focused on this whole
question of sacred science
and the need for
a sacred science.
One of his books has that title.
He's an Islamic scholar.
He's at George
Washington University.
And he has been writing
more eloquently than anyone
I know about the epistemology
of the sacred and the need
to develop and return
to ways of knowing
that bring us to a
much more expanded
profound panoramic
awareness of reality.
And I'll have a
little bit further
say about him toward the end.
Now, what happened with me is
that I, as most of you know,
began about 12 years ago
to work with people who'd
had these so-called
abduction experiences,
encounters with strange beings.
And I was at first
incredulous and then astounded
and then excited about
what I was finding.
I figured if I went out
there and wrote about that
and talked about that, everybody
who could listen, intelligent
or not, really, would
find it equally exciting
and find that this
is really important
and that we were in a
relationship with beings
from another dimension
or whatever it was.
But that wasn't the
response that I received.
I found a lot of people
got very upset about this
and began to wonder
why somebody who
was a more or less
respected Harvard professor
would embark on such a strange
and disturbing journey, just
a disturbed journey.
And the focus we came upon
me and what was wrong with me
that I should even take
such things seriously.
And of course, in the
psychiatric community
there's no shortage of
diagnoses for people like me.
The notion of a
midlife crisis was
extended into the late '60s,
which I found sort of curiously
satisfying in a way.
[LAUGHTER]
But the fact is this ran into
a kind of buzz saw in the media
and at Harvard.
So much so that a committee
was appointed, a three person
committee, to investigate.
There were vague hints
of a kind of Kafka
like nature that questions had
been raised about my methods.
And I was thoroughly
investigated for 15 months.
And the dean, when he presented
to me the letter telling me
that this committee had
been formed, said, "John,
you wouldn't be in,"
because we had been friends,
"You wouldn't be in
trouble if you had just
said you'd discovered a new
psychiatric syndrome whose
cause was unknown.
It's when you said
that this work required
that perhaps we reconsider
the nature of reality.
That's what got
you into trouble."
So I've thought
a lot about that.
One of the recommendations
of the committee
was that I should
involve more colleagues.
Well, I had a lot of trouble
doing that in the early years
because they dismissed
this out of hand
and wanted to be as far
away from me as possible.
But finally with the help of
Karen Wosolowski, who's here,
and others in our program, we
had a conference at Harvard.
Not sponsored by Harvard,
but two years ago
at the Harvard Divinity School,
in which we brought people
together from many
different fields
to look at how do we think
about, how do we study
anomalous phenomena like this.
And what emerged, among many
things, from this meeting
was that we lacked a reliable
science of human experience.
And especially of experiences,
however powerful or important,
that challenged the
prevailing worldview.
So I've begun to think
about that a great deal.
Now, rather than sort of taking
on the scientific method, which
is pretty popular
these days, I've
been more interested in what
is an offer that has been
so extraordinarily successful?
A friend of mine, Bill
Gibson's a playwright
who wrote "Two For The
Seesaw" and "Miracle Workers"
and a friend.
And he was raised as a Roman
Catholic and very quite strict.
And he sort of left that,
became very secular.
And then he kind of
wandered back occasionally
into the church.
And he said when he goes into
the church, he told me this,
when he goes into the
church, his consciousness
seems to open up and he feels
connected with the divine,
with beings that extend
beyond this world.
And it's an
incredible experience.
And then when he comes
out of the church,
he goes back to saying this
is reality, the material
world around me, and
he dismisses all that.
So I asked him, I
said, "Well Bill,
why you favor of the
worldview that you return
to when you come out of
the church over the one
that you experience
in the church?"
And he said that science, the
material science, Newtonian,
Cartesian science, wherever
you want to call it,
has been so successful
in giving us
a blueprint, a map of the world.
And so I argued
with him of course,
and I said, well what
about all these other
the dimensions
and this and that.
He said, but there's
no reliable way
of knowing what's true in
those other dimensions.
Anything seems to go.
So I thought about that.
And I begin to think about, how
do we decide when somebody's
reporting to us, profound,
powerful human experiences,
or potentially so, how do
we decide what to believe?
This is one of the reasons that
channeling is such a problem.
Some channeled information
is tremendously important
and the channelers people
of great integrity.
But anybody can sort
of hang on a shingle
and say they're channeling this
or that entity or god figure.
And the universe is just
as full of misinformation
out there as it
is in Washington.
So that question
began to really,
I began to wrestle
with that a lot.
It's also, as for example in
the so-called alien abduction
matter, the stakes
are very high.
We're dealing with
something which
so fundamentally challenges
the Western worldview.
As those of us that claim to
be or offering information
might do that are being held
to very tough standards.
And properly so, because the
scientific method, whatever
its limitations has
been, has developed
very clear standards
of experimentation,
testing, rational analysis,
replicability, and so forth.
And we don't have that.
And we can't have that.
But what can we have?
Well, we're dependent
on the reports.
Not entirely.
There is physical evidence.
For example, abductees do
have marks on their bodies.
There's missing time, although
it's hard to objectify that.
But the physical
evidence is kind
of like if you were trying to
study a giant and all that you
got was the toenail
of the giant.
I even like the image of
it because it's sort of
curved like a spaceship.
And you study that toenail.
You measure it and you get how
many toenails have you seen
or how many people have
seen it, this and that.
And you conclude this
is what it's about.
But you don't see the toe.
You don't see the
rest of the body.
giant that's there.
You miss knowing.
But how do you know the
giant of the reality beyond?
You know through consciousness,
through your whole self.
But how do you know
what's reliable?
And I don't have
the answer to this.
I just can keep asking this
question and addressing it.
In part it's a clinical
question because it
involves the reliability
of the people who
are making the reports.
And one of the
things it allowed me
to endure through this whole
Harvard inquisition period
was that I could keep saying,
look, you see these people.
You talk to them.
Do they seem like
they're suffering
from some kind of
mental condition?
Sometimes people just
refuse to see them.
But those who were willing
to come in the room with me
would come out shaking
their heads and say,
I see what you mean.
I don't understand this either.
And I keep saying,
nothing in my 40,
of course it's now more
than 40, years of experience
as a clinician has given me
one bit of information that
helps me understand what
I'm hearing psychiatrically.
The people are talking
to me about experiences
with emotion that's appropriate
to what they're talking about,
appropriate questioning.
They have solid lives otherwise.
There's nothing to
suggest delusion.
The only problem,
the only problem
is that what they're
talking about
is not considered possible
from the standpoint
of the worldview in which
they and I were raised.
Now, I happen to make
the choice of deciding
that it's something
wrong with the worldview
rather than that if would just
keep going down that same road,
we're going to find a syndrome
that's going to explain this.
But once you go down the road
of challenging the worldview,
things really begin
to get interesting.
The people's stories were
consistent one from another.
They would vary some.
Some were more traumatic.
Some were more opening up to
experiences of the divine.
But by and large there
was a consistent pattern
of the stories.
And they were
reported with feeling
that I could determine
was based on what
sounded like something that
had really happened to them.
And the intensity of the
feeling, as I mentioned,
the self-doubt, the clinical
soundness of these individuals.
All of this I could speak about.
But there was something more.
Because even that, I'd say,
look, I argued, I presented,
everybody do
psychological tests.
You find out that there's no
pathology that can explain it.
We have done studies that
appear of that nature.
And psychiatric
analyses don't reveal
anything that's
particularly helpful
or doesn't add anything to it.
But even those arguments
don't get anywhere
or don't get very
far, because there's
something missing in this
question of what is reliable.
And I came upon the
notion of the witness.
Now, this came because in
San Marino in April 1999,
I was at a conference.
And at that conference was
a Catholic prelate wearing
the cassock.
And he was talking about the
UFO and abduction phenomenon.
And he said, and he was not
speaking for the Vatican,
but clearly what he said was
not offensive to the Vatican,
he said, "I take this
very, very seriously why?
Because there are so
many reliable witnesses,
apparently reliable witnesses.
And in the church
when we're trying
to evaluate miracles, determine
what miracles to believe,
we have to depend on witnesses."
Now, what is a reliable witness?
Well, they go through
much of what we do.
Currently they've been using
psychiatric and psychological
examinations of people
reporting miracles.
But there is something about
the Witness with a capital W
that is in a sacred tradition.
Not just in the Catholic Church.
I talked with a zen
master about this.
He says that there's a
way that you experience
somebody who has
a clarity of mind,
does not have another
agenda, is not attached
to what they're saying.
There's a purity of the
way they express it.
You experience what they're
talking about as if it
were happening to yourself.
They convey to you
something that you just
are part of the experience.
And one of the people that
I work with, an experiencer,
said it's as if they come and
they've been touched by God.
You feel that there's
that connection that they
express and represent.
So I began then to
reinterpret my own job.
Since I'm not a direct
witness in the sense of having
had these experiences
with beings or been taken
or whatever happens
to people when
they encounter this phenomenon.
I began to look upon
myself as a kind of witness
to the witnesses, somebody
that helps give them voice
or asserts their reliability.
Because the notion of somebody
in my "position," quote,
unquote, and that's in
an archetypal sense,
has a chance, even
though it gets shot
at a lot, a chance to
be heard or to enable
other people to be heard.
So there is this relationship I
have with the experiences where
I am helping them
to be legitimized
because I'm convinced.
It's not just to help them
integrate their experiences.
And that's important in itself.
But I believe they
bring something
of extraordinary
importance to the culture.
In other words, they are
receiving information
from whatever source
this phenomenon emanates
from that says human
beings have to change.
We have to open
our consciousness.
We're acting like, as one of
the experiencers would call it,
rednecks in the galaxy.
[LAUGHTER]
Bent on destroying
not only ourselves,
but life way beyond ourselves,
other species on the planet,
and even causing a cosmic
ripple in the dimensions
of our destructiveness.
They have to change.
And the experiencers
have something
terribly important to
tell us about this.
But then those of us
that work with them
have that job of legitimizing,
trying to legitimize
what they have to say.
Now, Veronica who I've
not known very long.
In fact, the first time that
Veronica and I were ever
in a conference together,
I spontaneously, I
think it was in Palm
Springs even, wasn't it?
I just pulled her
up on the stage
and said, come on, darling,
let's do this together.
Because I had such a kind
of confidence in her as what
I've called a reliable witness.
>>One of the disadvantages
for me this time
is that I've had time to
think about this talk.
Whereas in Palm Springs, it
was so spontaneous I didn't.
And I hope that won't
work against me here.
I guess it's my feeling that all
of us, in one form or another,
have had some kind of
encounter, experience.
Otherwise we wouldn't
be in this room.
And so I would like to just
honor those invisible presences
that are here with us today.
What I'd like to do actually
is start with a dream.
Because one of the things
that has become increasingly
clear to me is that although
the encounter experience
that I had in 1989, which
is now 12 years ago,
it was not an isolated event.
I myself have not had
other encounter experiences
such as the one that I
had, as many people do
have repeated experiences.
But the story
doesn't stop there.
And what I've noticed is
that the link that was made
continues in different forms.
One for me is in my dreams.
They also happen
in other ways too.
So for example, if
I have dreams where
there are unknown
figures, I do what
Jung calls active imagination
and I engage the figures.
And I've found that
these luminous ones also
come through those meditative
kinds of experiences.
So the connection continues
and the journey continues.
So I'd like to
start with a dream
that I actually had on May
the first, just this month.
And as it turns out,
sort of mayday, mayday
has a kind of resonance in terms
of the content of this dream.
I'll just try and talk about
the part that's relevant.
There's an opening
scene, but it moves on.
It becomes apparent
there's a woman who's
had an unusual encounter with
a small yet powerful being
from another realm who has
disclosed some secrets to her
concerning the current
situation on Earth.
And she's going to tell
us what she was told.
This being, whose form was
a bluish glowing light,
revealed to her that
humans are really gods.
But this knowledge has been
too frightening for humans
to handle thus far.
And their terror about
this awesome realization
has made them, namely
us, run away in fear.
Our fear has been so
profound that the only means
of expressing our terror with
the power at our disposal
has been to create attitudes,
technologies, and weapons
of destruction that
have almost succeeded
in annihilating the Earth.
The extent of the
devaluing of life on Earth
has become so extreme
in recent years
that there have been
interventions made
from other realms
to help humans take
on the responsibility
of our divine natures
and to try to help us
accept our awesome power
in the service of the sacred.
In harmony with the
wholeness of creation,
both invisible and manifest.
In the service all creative
effort, not destruction.
In loving regard
for all being, not
fear resulting in expressions
of hatred and violence.
The dread become fear
needs to be transmuted
into the awe reserved for
the appropriate response
to the wondrous
beauty of creation.
The chaos of our
impoverished times
in which the tension of the
separation between humans
and the divine has reached
critical proportions,
has constellated the need
for a profound metanoia
in the hearts of all of us.
On many different levels and
in a diverse variety of ways,
through stones, through
sea creatures, visionaries
and children, the silent
and invisible ones,
and the active and outspoken.
Earth is receiving
tremendous aid
in shifting its
paradigm of reality
from an overly
constricted view based
in fear to one that calls us
back to our angelic resonance.
And that was the dream.
So these connections continue.
There are many different kinds
of these encounter experiences.
And all I want to say is that
this is the way it came to me.
What happened in the
encounter experience
was that I was on a
meditation retreat
in the Southern California
desert participating
in the second part of an
ancient mystery school retreat.
So I think it's important
to acknowledge the context.
I'm not trying to say that
there's a cause effect
relation.
But I'm trying to say that
I was in a field phenomenon.
I had been doing meditation
on all the chakras
in a fairly intensive setting
with a group for 12 days.
We'd done many
ceremonies and rituals.
And the conference was over and
I was living on the East Coast
at that time and I was going
to fly back the next day.
And a friend and I said,
well, you know, why don't we
go up the mountain over Palm
Springs and look at the view
below?
And so the two of
us got in the car
and we started driving
up the mountain.
We'd had dinner
with a group of us.
And it was probably about
8:00 in the evening.
Something like that.
It was still light
when we started anyway.
So we began to make
our way up one of them
beautiful mountains
surrounding Palm Springs.
And there were two features
about the actual journey
up the mountain.
One was that it was an
incredibly blustery evening.
There was a lot of wind
sort of bashing the car.
And the other thing
was that there
was a lot of traffic on
the road up and down.
So we got near the top
and it was already dark.
And so we said, well,
let's just get off
of this view parking lot thing.
And so we parked the
car and we looked out
from the mountain down towards
the town, the lights below.
But it was so cold and
windy that we said, well,
don't let's hang around
and we'll go back down.
At which point my companion
turned back towards the car
and he suddenly
noticed this what
seemed like a stationary object
off the side of the mountain.
And it had these
circulating colored lights
on its underbelly.
And that was really only
the part that we could see.
So I don't really know what the
shape of whatever this was was.
But he saw him and he said,
looking at it like this,
he said, well, what
do you think that is?
So I followed his gaze and I
turned to where he was looking.
And at that point, an
extraordinary thing happened.
The whole landscape
suddenly shifted
into a completely
different dimension.
That's the only way
I can describe it.
Our feet were still planted
on the same geographical spot.
But the wind
completely disappeared
and the entire traffic
completely disappeared.
What happened was
the landscape became
illumined by a sort of moon.
If I were to try to describe
it, it was a kind of moonscape,
as if a light source you didn't
know illuminated the land
that we were on.
But as I say, it was moved into
a profound kind of stillness.
And the wind and traffic
were no longer present.
There was this union of the
timeless with the time bound.
As if fully knowledgeable
of my own presence,
but in communion
with something that
was eternal and transcendent.
The other feeling
was one of a kind
of benign, compassionate,
loving presence.
I think we are being called
increasingly to the center that
is the heart.
I don't know how
long that event took.
When I say to
people I don't know,
I can only say it seemed
like about two minutes.
Even that may be
longer than it was.
But when that window,
whatever it was, closed,
the wind came back
with full force
and the traffic was
again on the road
going up and down the road.
It was an extraordinarily
awesome experiences.
That's the only way
I know how to say it.
We got back in the car
and we drove down and back
to the house that
we were guests in.
And two things about that.
One, everybody was
in bed and asleep.
It was 2 o'clock in the morning.
I didn't realize
that at the time.
It was actually only
later that I suddenly
realized, well, what happened
between about nine and two?
The other thing was that
when I went into the bathroom
and looked in the mirror,
I had light radiating off
a rainbow kind of aura
radiating off my form.
When I went back
to the East Coast,
I didn't tell a couple of
people about this experience.
I'm sorry to say that I've been
a Jungian therapist for about
20 years and have worked
a lot with dreams.
It's almost impossible, I hope
I'm not offending anybody here.
I'm sure there are exceptions.
But what was sad to me was
that this experience could not
be valued for the actual
ontological reality
that it had.
In other words, if I'd reported
this experience as a dream,
it would have been
much more acceptable.
Because with dreams, particular
in the Jungian tradition,
you appreciate dreams for
their symbolic as if resonance.
But it's as if it's not OK to
have a really real experience,
even though these experiences
are not of the ordinary world.
Nevertheless, they're
not interior experiences.
It's not something
that's happening inside.
It is actually a movement
to a new outside,
but the outside is not
that of ordinary reality.
Like John, I feel
that there's a kind
of perennial ancient mystic,
gnostic, alchemical gnosis that
before our time, our time being
the last 400 or 500 years,
knew these states of being
and highly valued them.
For example, in
the Sufi tradition
it's called the
mundus imaginalis.
A third ontological
realm between pure spirit
and the sensory world.
And in alchemy, of course,
it has other names too.
The imaginatio verit.
And that was distinguished
from fantasy.
It was a world that was in
between matter and spirit,
a subtle body realm but
they are constructed
by unconditional
cosmic compassion.
And the other is that
they're landscapes
of tremendous beauty.
Beauty being also a value
that we have lost, I think,
in our time.
And they carry enormous
emotional and healing powers.
And this is what I think is
being recovered in our time.
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
>>I wanted to mention something
that's coming up in my work
now, which is the
sort of frontier edge.
I'm reading about
and seeing in my work
people that are
having experiences
with so-called reptilian beings.
And these experiences vary
from sexual encounters
to violent encounters
even to people
being devoured by these beings.
But whatever the experiences
are, they are powerful
and they are primal
and they are very real.
And it occurred to me while
I was thinking about this,
the original or first epic
in the English language
was "Beowulf."
And what "Beowulf" is
about, if you recall,
is the heroic figure
there wrestles
with a dragon by
the name of Grendel
and later with his mother,
which hardly needs interpreting.
And he drowns in the water.
The son, Grendel, he
just crunches and crushes
in a great battle.
It made me think what
connection there might be.
And this is speculative.
I wouldn't do this
anyplace but here.
But what connection
is there with the fact
that our first epic is a battle
between a reptilian dragon
being and a heroic human?
And to me those battles
are very similar to what
I hear about in the whole
reptilian struggle of some
of the abduction experiences.
So I thought two
things about this.
One is there's some aspect
of our own primal reptilian
phylogenetically carried
nature that we have not
come to terms with.
And right in that
first epic, we're
projecting it
outside of ourselves
and then destroying it.
So there's sort of a more
somewhat standard return
of the repressed phenomenon
there to be integrated
and dealt with.
But that doesn't quite do it.
I mean, that's important
and that's part of it.
But the other part of it is
that these beings are not simply
projections.
In other words, we have
this anthropocentric notion
coming down through
psychology and psychiatry
that these mythic
entities are simply
projections of our
own unconscious,
mythic or otherwise.
And we don't credit the fact
that the universe may actually
contain beings of this
kind that reach us
from another dimension.
That's more disturbing
to our world view.
But I think the last
thing about that
that came up just
a few days ago when
I was working with a woman
who was having reptilian
encounters that for her were
highly negative involving
the devouring of babies and
terrible filth and terror.
And she said something at
the end of the session,
because she became much calmer
as we integrated some very
disturbing experiences.
She said, you think that if
we put out negative energy,
it attracts negative
experiences?
And that fit her very well.
Because she was a
person full of anger,
trying to move beyond anger.
And that's doesn't
mean this, again,
was a projection
of our own psyche.
But in some way,
the relationship,
the connection in
consciousness between her
and whatever was coming
to her made sense.
In other words, it was
the kind of experiences
that you would expect.
I see Veronica as
somebody who would
be more likely to be
having experiences
of love and enlightenment
of a different kind.
And I think that may be
related, this is speculative,
of the energy that she puts out.
I know that Stan Grof
came here and is here
and I want to acknowledge Stan.
I always acknowledge this with
a little bit of mixed feelings.
[APPLAUSE]
On the one hand, I'm
deeply grateful to him
because I learned about
nonordinary experiences
as I never had before
during the training with him
and working with
him over the years.
The slight sort of
downward slope on this
is that he got me into this work
with the abduction phenomenon.
Because in the middle of
the training, for reasons
I've really never asked
him why he did this,
he handed me a paper in a book
on spiritual emergencies, which
was about the UFO
encounter phenomenon.
And I kept asking myself
after I read it, OK, this
is kind of Jungian
interpretation of it.
And I kept asking myself, yeah,
but is it really happening?
Is it real?
And within a few months I
began to see cases and sort
of totally changed my life.
And so for good or ill.
Anyway, thank you
in a way, Stan.
>>Dr. Mack, have
made any comparisons
between the
contactee experiences
and the ever increasing
number of those
that claim to be the victim
of some kind of mind control
technology?
>>That's another
frontier in this field.
Somebody did a study at
McCarthy in New Jersey.
Something like 40% of people
that are reporting mind control
experiments, when they were
studied in greater depth,
are abductees.
And there is a whole
complex of phenomenon
which seem to be
interrelated, which
is a kind of dark
frontier in this.
By the way, speaking
of dark frontiers,
did you happen to notice
the cartoon in the latest
Newsweek which shows a
Darth Vader figure tapping
Mr. Rumsfeld, the Secretary
of Defense Rumsfeld,
looms over him to
start tapping him.
And he's saying to him,
"I am your father."
[LAUGHTER]
The latest Newsweek.
I mean, they're
catching on out there.
And I mean, the whole
militarization of space
deserves some discussion in
terms of the dark energies.
So you take the
military abduction.
This is a very
controversial area.
Some people report
that aliens and they've
seen aliens and military
people working together
in underground bases.
Other people report the NSA is
doing all kinds of mind control
experiments on the abductees
or they meet the abductees
when they come out of the
ships and there they are.
And this may be related
to the nonordinary state
work I've done, but I tend
to see this not necessarily
entirely literally.
More as some kind of archetypal
expression of the shadow
side of our whole being.
Where the whole military complex
represents that shadow and is
emergent with the abduction
phenomenon in some way.
Not that there isn't a lot of
destructive stuff going on.
But when it's connected with
the abduction phenomenon,
I tend not to take it
entirely literally.
But I don't know.
So it's a scary area.
I mean, I've stayed away
from it in some ways.
I mean, it's an
area where people
have done this
research have gotten
into disappeared mysteriously
or gotten-- I don't know.
I don't even want to.
It's a very disturbing subject.
>>Veronica.
I'm curious.
Your companion that
night, you said
you were with someone when
you had that experience.
>>Yes.
>>What was your
companion's experience?
>>Well, we both experienced
the phenomenon of the landscape
shifting, the light shifting,
the wind, the traffic
disappearing and
the pathway that
was opened up between
where we were standing
and the object in the sky.
We talked on the phone from time
to time about this experience
because it was so unlike
anything either of us
had experienced.
When I did the recovery of
missing time, all I can say
is that I don't claim that
what came through when
I did go to recover
that period of time
that it should be
taken literally.
All I can say is
that what happened
was so beyond anything that
I could have anticipated
would occur.
He did not accompany
me onto the,
for want of a better
word, vessel or ship.
So I don't know about
that part of it for him.
And I think it was actually
rather terrifying for him
and he didn't really want
to go into it anymore.
So I think the
content of that part
was probably very different.
I did want to say just very
briefly about this dark aspect.
I think if you look at all
the religious traditions
of the world, and
then I'll stick
in mystical traditions, the
element of the dark night
of the soul or the black sun.
There are these connections
between the dark
and the light in all
mystical traditions.
And that is part
of any analysis.
It's part of a
spiritual journey.
Facing the dark
aspects are extremely
important for the development of
self knowledge and the journey
to the divine.
And I think that's become part
of also the UFO experience.
>>Dr. Mack, in your experience
of using past life regression
with people, how far
back have you taken them
and how far back to have people
had reptilian experiences?
>>I don't take people into past
life regression experiences.
They just happen.
But you have to
ask the question.
In other words, somebody's
in a relaxation session.
I don't even use
the word hypnosis
because of all the
baggage it has.
Somebody puts their
head back and relaxes
and they go onto a trance.
I don't even call
that trance anymore,
because I think what we
call normal reality is
the real trance now.
But they'll say something
like, oh god, I'm here again.
That means they've been born.
Now, I can ignore
that and say, what's
it like being here again?
Or I can say, again?
What do you mean?
And then they'll go into
a past life experience.
But it's not like I go back,
back, back, back, back.
One woman I work
with immediately
associated to an
experience which occurred
when she was in ancient India.
Must've been 5,000
years ago where
she was born into
a very poor family
and her soul was present at
the moment of conception.
And this was where in her
soul's journey she needed to be
was to be in this most
primitive humiliating,
humiliating in the
sense of simple,
kind of unpretentious life.
And it does seem that
abduction experiences,
and maybe it's just
because my own,
having gone that route,
I'm open to anything.
So I get to hear about
past life experiences.
It may not be that abductees
are particularly prone to that.
Although it does
seem that they are
open to nonordinary
states of consciousness
by their experiences.
And then they readily recall
past life experiences.
The furthest back
was a man that I
wrote about in my first
book on abduction who
actually found himself back
in the time the dinosaurs.
And again, this
reptilian consciousness
which kept knocking
on my door began then.
But I didn't think
much about it.
And now it's become something
that I think about and hear
about a lot.
And I think it's
related to what Veronica
was saying about the shadow
side or the dark side
of our natures.
The unintegrated reptilian.
I don't want to give
reptiles a bad rap here.
It's something more to do
with the most primal parts
of our inner being
that we haven't
come to terms with in our
socialization process.
Dr. Mack, you mentioned earlier
about "Beowulf" and dragons.
Is it possible that many of our
ancient folk tales and fairy
tales are actually based on
true experiences of people
having such experiences
with reptilian figures
or visiting other
worlds, other realities,
opening a magical door, going
into another reality then
returning to this world
with new enlightenment?
Even something as recent
as "Alice in Wonderland."
>>I think that's a
wonderful question.
I don't know the answer.
I think there's some kind
of energetic or connected
systemic relationship between
these creatures, monsters,
reptiles, whatever, that
appear in fairy tales and myths
that are both part
of our psyches
but also have some kind
of ontological validity
outside of ourselves and that
we have yet to integrate.
And I mean, for example, the
whole Godzilla type series
of movies which began
in Japan, interestingly,
after the atomic bomb went off.
And these creatures
presumably were originally
kind of mutations that turned
reptilian monsters after what
we did in using the atomic bomb.
Similarly, we have all these
very popular monster alien
movies, which are kind of
these horrible reptilian
like creatures with
sticky bodies and tails.
And this is part of our whole
world that we have not really,
we're scared of it,
but we haven't seen it
as something of ourselves.
And so I think it's very
much related to the violence
we perpetrate by not
owning this and coming
to terms with this
dimension of ourselves.
>>It's clear from
your work and others
that people are having
alien abduction experiences.
In current times people
have experiences with things
that look like flying saucers.
In the previous century,
people had experiences
with things that looked like
dirigibles before the word
dirigibles.
I'd like to ask you whether you
believe these experiences are
endogenous, coming out of
the person's subconscious
processes, or whether the
aliens they're experiencing
are independent creatures
with their own alien agenda
independent of us, or
something entirely different.
>>Well the simplest
answer is both.
I believe that they have
an ontological status which
we don't understand, which
is in part archetypal
and a reflection of our own
unconscious in the way Jung
talked about it.
I also believe but in the
sense of William James
that there is a
true provoker here.
That there is a physical reality
that comes to us from outside.
And this has to do, I think,
with what Richard Tarnas
and Stan and others have
written about that we have
systematically in our
anthropocentric humanism
voided the cosmos of
all intelligence other
than that which is a
projection of our own minds.
And that is it
catastrophe in itself
and has left us, as
Rick Tarnas says,
in a terrible state
of mourning and grief.
Because we have in
that process completely
rid the universe, not only of
all intelligent and beings,
with god itself.
So here we are
completely alone and
unrelated beyond our immediate
material circumstances.
I mentioned Professor
Nasr, Seyyed Nasr.
And in several of the
books of his I read,
the thesis is that by
restricting our consciousness,
our epistemology to
the material world,
to cutting ourselves
off from the divine,
we have thereby
allowed ourselves
to become these destructive
agent in the cosmos.
What I mentioned, these
rednecks in the universe.
And that we're not accountable.
We're not accountable to any
kind of spiritual hierarchy.
And it seems to me the
most important thing
about these experiences,
and my thoughts about this,
I like the question,
but it keeps evolving.
Right now I think that the
most important aspect of it
is if we can legitimize
the experiences of people
like Veronica, the most
important aspect of it
is that we are
learning something.
We are being told something.
We have been given
vital information
about what we're doing to
the earth, about what we're
doing to ourselves,
to one another,
and that it's a wake up.
It's an attempt to wake us up.
And we are aware of this trance.
I live with an
eight-year-old child.
So I get to see a lot
of children's movies
that I wouldn't probably
otherwise go to see.
So I went to see with him
"Rocky and Bullwinkle."
How many of you have seen
it, "Rocky and Bullwinkle."
Anyone at all?
Doesn't matter.
Anyway, what that's about is
that this fearless leader,
this bad guy, well he was
actually in a TV series
in the '60s as kind
of a Nazi character
called Fearless Leader.
And he's got to
Russian accomplices.
And he's taking over the
country and presumably the world
eventually through our RBTV.
Now RBTV is Really
Bad Television.
What he does is he broadcasts
nonstop these soporific
programs.
This sort of sterile
marketing of him
and all the empty products
and meaningless stuff,
which of course is
very much like what
we're getting for real now.
And everybody's kind
of like zombies.
They don't know what to do and
they're going to vote for him
and make him president.
So Bullwinkle, using
the latest technology,
gets sent by email
into the studio
and emerges from the
fax machine just in time
to break up the
television equipment.
And as he does so, blows up
the television equipment,
they can't hear Fearless
Leader's voice anymore.
And they all begin to
wake up from the trance.
You see them in the movie.
And then they begin to
think for themselves.
So somehow I see this
phenomenon as like that.
As a wake up.
Trying to get through to us.
We're cut off of through
this RBTV and the like
from our relationship with
the divine, with spirit.
And to get to us, because
we are so cut off,
it has to get to us in
a form we can recognize.
And this is why we
don't pay attention
to esoteric religion
like the Kabbalah
or all the Sufi truth or
even Seyyed Nasr's incredibly
eloquent words
because we are not
engaged in the practice
of knowing the divine.
So it has to take a
form we can recognize.
UFOs and spaceships
and this kind of thing.
Not that they're not real.
They've been around
for centuries.
There's pictures
from the Renaissance
which shows UFOs in
Renaissance paintings.
But it's hard to interpret
some of these things.
But it's now that
phenomena like this
are coming to us as
if a kind of return
of the repressed from the
cosmos through the spiritually
impaired.
It's a crashing through.
And I think that the experiences
are receiving this information
like in this way that is so
profoundly transformative,
as Veronica was talking about.
And I think that's the most
important aspect of it.
And this is the thing I wanted
to really emphasize and close
with is that we have
work to do in developing
a reliable epistemology
methodology science, whatever
you want to call it.
A way of knowing.
Because knowing was
originally a sacred act
for knowing the divine.
It wasn't just about breaking
up pieces of the material world
and then studying
them in isolation.
Knowing was about opening
consciousness, soul to who
we were in a much larger sense.
And we've lost that.
So in a way, what I think
this is helping us to do
is force me to do is
to work on developing
a sacred science or an
epistemology of the divine
or whatever it would be.
So we can begin to legitimate
this kind of a report.
Which tends to get
rejected and ridiculed
for all kinds of reasons,
because it is threatening,
and all the reasons you know.
But there is also
the valid critique
which is that we
haven't developed
a reliable, systematic way
of knowing and understanding
these realms from which we
have so separated ourselves.
Thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]